# Origins of racial/ethnic disparities in antibiotic consumption in the United States

Scott W. Olesen<sup>1,3</sup>, Sanjat Kanjilal<sup>2</sup>, Stephen M. Kissler<sup>3</sup>, Daphne S. Sun<sup>3</sup>, Yonatan H. Grad<sup>3</sup>

1. Biobot Analytics 
2. Harvard Medical School & Harvard Pilgrim Healthcare Institute
3. Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health

## Abstract 

## Introduction

Racial/ethnic disparities arise throughout the continuum of care, impacting one's risk of disease acquisition<sup>x</sup>, access to care<sup>x</sup>, clinical treatment<sup>x</sup>, and disease outcomes<sup>x</sup>. These disparities exist in the context of antibiotic prescribing in the United States, where white patients receive substantially more antibiotics than patients of other races/ethnicities<sup>SWO</sup>. Due to concerns about antibiotic resistance, much attention has been placed on managing antibiotic over-consumption, which from the racial/ethnic perspective entails identifying and counteracting the drivers of elevated prescribing to white patients. Still, under-consumption of antibiotics also carries risks, as untreated infections can cause long-term physical harm<sup>x</sup>. It is therefore necessary to find ways to achieve equitable antibiotic prescribing, in which antibiotics are given just as often as they are needed, while simultaneously addressing upstream drivers of inequitable antibiotic consumption.

To achieve fully equitable antibiotic consumption, each racial/ethnic group should have the same (1) probability of aquiring a given infection, (2) access to care (_i.e.,_ the rate and level of care sought for a given illness), and (3) treatment by the care provider (_i.e.,_ the probability of receiving an antibiotic prescription when presenting with a given illness). It is critical to identify at which of these stages disparities arise. For example, if elevated antibiotic consumption in white patients is primarily due to seeking care for illnesses that do not merit an antibiotic prescription, greater parient and physician outreach may be warranted. If instead the relatively lower antibiotic consumption in non-white populations is attributable to barriers to care, this suggests that structural interventions are needed to improve access to care for these groups. 

Various lines of evidence suggest that racial/ethnic disparities may affect antibiotic prescribing rates long before a patient seeks care. Rates of some infections differ profoundly between races/ethnicities<sup>x</sup>, and barriers to care often coincide with communities that are largely non-white<sup>x</sup>. Disparities may also arise from within the provider's ofice, with non-white patients more likely to have their health concerns underappreciated or dismissed<sup>x</sup>. However, we have lacked a comprehensive understanding of how disparities at each of these key stages contribute to the overall inequity in antibiotic prescribing among racial/ethnic groups in the United States. 

Here, we used a nationally representative survey of healthcare visits to assess the degree to which racial/ethinic differences in outpatient healthcare utilization and prescribing each contribute to the overall disparities in antibiotic prescribing. 

## Methods
__Data.__ Records of outpatient visits and associated prescriptions were extracted from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS)<sup>x</sup> and the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NHAMCS)<sup>x</sup>. These datasets capture information about healthcare encounters at free-standing clinics and emergency departments, respectively, and are obtained from provider surveys. The surveys are designed to generate nationally representative information about the provision of health care. Each encounter is listed with a set of diagnosis codes, associated prescriptions, and patient demographic information, including race and ethnicity. We conducted our analysis using the 2016 and 2018 surveys, the most recent years in which both surveys were conducted. 

__Classifying visits.__ 
Each healthcare visit was classified as antibiotic-appropriate, potentially antibiotic-appropriate, or antibiotic-inappropriate by a two-step process<sup>x</sup>. First, using previously established categorizations of the ICD-10 diagnosis codes, each diagnosis code associated with each visit was classified as always antibiotic-appropriate, sometimes antibiotic-appropriate, or never antibiotic-appropriate. Second, each visit was classified based on its diagnoses. A visit with at least one always-appropriate diagnosis was classified as antibiotic-appropriate. Remaining unclassified visits with at least one sometimes-appropriate code were classified as potentially antibiotic-appropriate. Remaining unclassified visits with at least one never-appropriate code were classified as antibiotic-inappropriate. 

Separately, each visit was classified as a visit with antibiotics if any of the prescribed or administered medications included oral antibiotics<sup>x</sup>. Note that all visits were classified according to their associated diagnoses, regardless of whether antibiotics were prescribed or not. Thus, most visits were considered antibiotic-inappropriate, not because patients were seeking antibiotics for antibiotic-inappropriate conditions, but rather because most healthcare visits were not made for the purpose of treating bacterial infections.

<!-- We identified encounters in which oral antibiotics were prescribed using xxxxxxxx (__Supplemental Methods__). We classified these prescriptions as appropriate, potentially appropriate, or inappropriate depending on the diagnosis associated with the encounter using existing methods<sup>x</sup>.  -->

__Statistical approach.__ 

Differences in rates were assessed using t-tests, with p < 0.01 considered statistically significant, as recommended in the NHAMCS documentation<sup>x</sup>. Differences in proportions were assessed using $\Chi^2$ tests. All analyses were performed using R (version 4.0.5)<sup>x</sup>, with the survey package (version 4.0)<sup>x</sup> used to account for the complex survey design in variance estimation. The population denominators for each race/ethnicity provided in the NAMCS/NHAMCS documentation, which are drawn from US Census estimates, were used for population-based rate estimates. Code to reproduce these analyses is available at GitHub (doi: 10.5281/zenodo.6233588).

## Results
- Racial/ethnic differences in overall antibiotics consumed (per year)
- Racial/ethnic differences in visit rates
- Racial/ethnic differences in P(prescription | visit)


| RACE/ETH | ABX/YEAR | VISITS/YEAR |  ABX/VISIT   |
|----------|----------|-------------|--------------|
|          | <b>A S I</b> | <b>A S I</b> | <b>A  S  I</b> |
| NHW      | #  #   # | #    #    # | #    #    #  |
| NHB      | #  #   # | #    #    # | #    #    #  |
| HSP      | #  #   # | #    #    # | #    #    #  |
| NHO      | #  #   # | #    #    # | #    #    #  |


## Discussion


<!-- Most fundamentally, it is necessary to estimate the extent to which antibiotic prescribing inequities arise prior to _vs._ from within the provider's office. Some studies<sup>x</sup> indicate that access to care and rates of illness differ between races/ethnicities, implying disparities from outside the provider's office feeding into disparities in prescribing. Other studies <sup>x</sup> indicate that physicians simetimes treat patients of various racial/ethnic backgrounds differently, suggesting an additional potential effect from within the provider's office. Various studies have examined the impact of patient and provider characteristics in determining antibiotic prescribing rates, especially once care has been sought, but we lack a clear understanding of racial/ethnic disparities in pre-visit factors. Improving this understanding would pave the way for more effective and equitable antibiotic stewardship. However, we have lacked data on the patient experience with sufficient demographic information to explicitly link antibiotic prescriptions to their reasons for visits by race and ethnicity. -->

<!-- - At the most fundamental level, it is necessary to estimate the extent to which prescribing inequities arise prior to _vs._ from within the provider's office. 
- Some studies indicate that access to care and rates of illness differ between races/ethnicities. 
- Other studies indicate that physicians treat patients of different racial/ethnic backgrounds differently. 
- We know that pre-visit factors have influenced both geographic and temporal variation in antibiotic prescribing, but the role of these factors in racial/ethnic disparities has not yet been explored. 
- A clearer perspective on the origins of prescribing inequities would pave the way for more effective antibiotic stewardship, improving the balance between the costs and benefits of antibiotic prescribing. 
- However, we have lacked data on the patient experience with sufficient demographic information to explicitly link antibiotic prescriptions to their reasons for visits by race/ethnicity.  -->
<!-- - 
- Here, we used a nationally representative survey of healthcare visits to assess the relative importance of healthcare utilization and prescribing practice on antibiotic use by race/ethnicity... -->

<!-- Disparities in antibiotic prescribing can arise at any of these stages of care. To restore equity in prescribing, i -->
