# Origins of racial/ethnic disparities in antibiotic consumption in the United States

Scott W. Olesen<sup>1,3</sup>, Sanjat Kanjilal<sup>2</sup>, Stephen M. Kissler<sup>3</sup>, Daphne S. Sun<sup>3</sup>, Yonatan H. Grad<sup>3</sup>

1. Biobot Analytics 
2. Harvard Medical School & Harvard Pilgrim Healthcare Institute
3. Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health

## Abstract 

## Introduction

- Racial/ethnic disparities arise throughout the continuum of care, from disease risk<sup>x</sup> to access to care<sup>x</sup> to treatment<sup>x</sup> to disease outcomes<sup>x</sup>. 
- These disparities are especially well-documented in the context of antibiotic prescribing: white patients receive substantially more antibiotics than patients of other races and ethnicities (SWO). 
- Much recent attention has been placed on managing antibiotic over-consumption, which contributes to antibiotic resistance.
- Still, under-consumption of antibiotics also carries risks, as untreated infections – even mild ones – can cause long-term physical harm.
-  
- Equity suggests that each racial/ethnic group should have the same (a) probability of infection, (b) access to care (rate of seeing physician given an illness), and (c) treatment by the prescribing physician (odds of receiving a prescription given illness). 
- The observed disparities in antibiotic consumption imply underlying disparities one or more of these stages of care. 
- To restore equity in prescribing, it is critical to identify where disparities arise within the care pathway that leads from illness to antibiotic consumption. 
- For example, if elevated antibiotic consumption in white patients is primarily linked with prescribing for illnesses that may not merit an antibiotic prescription, greater patient and physician outreach may be warranted.
- If instead the relatively lower antibiotic consumption in non-white populations is attributable to barriers to care, this suggests more structural interventions to improve access to care for these groups are necessary. 
- 
- At the most fundamental level, it is necessary to estimate the extent to which prescribing inequities arise prior to _vs._ from within the provider's office. 
- Some studies indicate that access to care and rates of illness differ between races/ethnicities. 
- Other studies indicate that physicians treat patients of different racial/ethnic backgrounds differently. 
- We know that pre-visit factors have influenced both geographic and temporal variation in antibiotic prescribing, but the role of these factors in racial/ethnic disparities has not yet been explored. 
- A clearer perspective on the origins of prescribing inequities would pave the way for more effective antibiotic stewardship, improving the balance between the costs and benefits of antibiotic prescribing. 
- However, we have lacked data on the patient experience with sufficient demographic information to explicitly link antibiotic prescriptions to their reasons for visits by race/ethnicity. 
- 
- Here, we used a nationally representative survey of healthcare visits to assess the relative importance of healthcare utilization and prescribing practice on antibiotic use by race/ethnicity...

<!-- 
- This raises the need to understand where racial/ethnic disparities in antibiotic consumption arise from, to what extent they relate to appropriate vs. inappropriate prescriptions, and to what extent they can be equalized through various types of interventions.  -->

<!-- Previous attempt: 

- Antibiotic consumption comes with a cost (resistance).
- Under-consumption of antibiotics also carries risks, as untreated infections – even mild ones – can cause long-term physical harm.
- This raises the need to enable appropriate antibiotic prescribing: for conditions where it is needed, and no more. 
- 
- Antibiotic prescribing rates differ by race/ethnicity (SWO)
- Antibiotic resistance rates also vary by race/ethnicity (DS)
- Equity suggests that each race/ethnicity should have the same (a) probability of infection, (b) access to care (rate of seeing physician given an illness), and (c) treatment by the prescribing physician (odds of receiving a prescription given illness). 
- Inequities in one or more of these areas must be in play; but we don't yet know where. 
- 
- To restore equity in antibiotic prescribing, we first need to understand where inequities arise in the care pathway that leads from illness to antibiotic consumption. 
- Most fundamentally, we need to know the extent to which prescribing inequities arise prior to vs. from within the provider's office. 
- Some studies indicate that access to care and rates of illness differ between races/ethnicities. 
- Other studies indicate that physicians treat patients of different racial/ethnic backgrounds differently. 
- A clearer perspective on the origins of prescribing inequities would pave the way for more effective interventions, whether through preventing disease, improving access to care, or conducting patient or physician outreach. 
- However, we have lacked data on the patient experience with sufficient demographic information to explicitly link antibiotic prescriptions to their reasons for visits by race/ethnicity. 
- 
- Here, we used a nationally representative survey of healthcare visits to assess the relative importance of healthcare utilization and prescribing practice on antibiotic use by race/ethnicity... -->

## Methods

- NAMCS/NHAMCS
	- Nationally representative
	- Includes patient demographics, diagnosis, and prescriptions as provided by physicians or hospital staff.
- Appropriateness
- Statistical approach 

## Results
- Racial/ethnic differences in overall antibiotics consumed (per year)
- Racial/ethnic differences in visit rates
- Racial/ethnic differences in P(prescription | visit)

## Discussion